We're gonna switch gears now and go into
some more important parts of life, okay?
Which is, you should learn a bunch
of cool stuff when it comes to your
operating system, okay?
There's a lot of fun things
that are just available and
really what it comes down
to is the Unix tool set.
I still remember this one time I had 2011,
I wanna say it is it might have been 2012.
Yeah, 2012, I went and interviewed for a
company called web filings at the time now
known as we're Kiva publicly traded
company, Bozeman, Montana, Bozeman.
And when I interviewed there, one of
the questions went along this lines.
We have been hacked and they put a bunch
of salacious links in our website,
viagra.com or something, right?
My gosh, they're like very salacious and
so they're all throughout our website and
you need to go find them all and
delete them all.
And this is during the day where
you still FTP a lot of the times,
this is a long time ago.
And so it's like, okay, so
that means we need to go find this.
So what did I do,
as a budding young student?
Well, I did the only
thing I knew how to do.
I did public static void main args,
string args, did all that,
got it in there, tokenized, walked
through all the files, every directory
recursively walked through it,
did the whole thing all the way through.
And then they're like, wow, that was
really good cuz you used anything else.
So I'm like, I don't know, right?
I had no idea if you could use anything
else cuz I didn't know that I could
just simply use Zed, not Zed.
If a Zed is an editor,
Sed is n not an editor.
If I already knew the link I was
looking for, I could just find him and
just replaced him.
If I just wanted the file and
locations, I could have used crap.
These things just didn't exist
in my head when I was younger,
and I spent countless hours writing
programs that already exist and
can be used in an ad hoc way all the time.
And so don't be me, it's not good, right?
Don't be me from the past or
the future really, don't be me either way.
And so I'm gonna show you a bunch
of stuff that is just super great.
If you do create your own tools, just
to always remember accept standard in,
go on standard out for the output,
standard error for any sort of errors.
Don't break that because then you
can chain things together, and
chaining things together
makes your life really good.
Don't forget that.
All right, so FZF,
we don't really need to talk about FZF.
We talked about FZF, FZF was great,
you saw how powerful it is.
So we're just gonna kinda
leave that one out and
not because I want to leave it out
because you guys already know about it.
All right, so we're gonna talk
about one really cool one.
This is like a hidden
treasure of the CLI tools.
Okay, there appears to be
only a few of you here.
Hands up, who knows about JQ?
Okay, half of the people
here know about JQ.
Which is always kinda
shocking because JQ is
an exceptionally convenient
thing to have on your system.
You will be just blown
away by how amazing it is.
And I will tell you personal side story,
that I have probably saved 100 to 200
hours worth of programming by spending
five minutes learning a couple things and
asking ChatGPT, how to do various things.
It works actually pretty well with GPT.
GPT knows exactly what to do with this
one cuz this falls under GPT best thing,
which is, it only has so
many options, and it can just do it.
So this is really, really good,
very hard for it to hallucinate,
though it still figures out
how to do it even with JQ.
All right, so let's create this file.
If you guys wanna follow along,
create a really simple file
that has a type that is foo or
bar just two types.
It doesn't really matter what they're,
I just want them to be distinct, and
then I want a values
array that are numbers.
And then the other one, I want it to
be a values dictionary with a and b.
They're intentionally different.
Foo has an array, bar has a dictionary,
okay, or an object.
Since this is Javascript object notation,
it would be an object a POJO,
it has a POJO.
So now that we have that file here,
I should probably copy and
paste this file myself.
I'm gonna copy it and jump over here.
We can just do it in the dev directory,
it really doesn't matter.
So I'm gonna jump over here.
Not the dev directory, dev-env directory.
All right, so I'm gonna jump over here and
I'm gonna create a file called out, right?
It doesn't really matter, I don't
really care what this thing is called.
There we go, it has all these
beautiful things in it, okay?
There we go, there's all of our items.
And so now if I go here and
I cat out, there they all are.
Okay, everyone sees them?
They're right there.
So here's some cool things
you can do with JQ.
We're gonna start with something really,
really simple.
You can either pipe it to JQ or
JQ can read it as a file.
So if I pipe cat or cat out piped into JQ,
and now makes them all pretty.
Look at all that, look how nice that is.
You can then re-pipe that into the JQ and
make it compact.
That's pretty cool, right, look at that.
Okay, that's just a little bit of cool,
just a little bit of cool.
Notice it's by line.
So that way you could have,
like imagine you have log files and
you need to go through thousands
upon thousands of log files.
You can now start saying, okay, I can see
this thing becoming inherently useful.
Just wait,
we're gonna get way more awesome.
I think I'm jumping ahead,
you have prettify log files.
You can also do it this way, right?
JQ with no first argument, and
then the file it wants to read, and
I'll just do that as well.
I'm always just in the habit of cating the
file and then piping it, I don't know why.
Okay, this is just who I am.
All I know is, every single time I
do that, there's always some guy,
grep actually can take a file and
it's just like, I know.
I just don't remember, it's just who I am.
Okay, all right, so check this out.
Do you see this thing right here?
All this stuff, what I'm gonna do is,
I'm gonna do something.
Okay, I'm gonna do something,
it's gonna get a little weird here.
I'm gonna go back to devprod-2.
I'm going to search for,
wait, what was it?
Check this out, okay, so here it is.
There's that data that I just showed you,
right?
It's big, okay, I'm in vim right now.
This is fully unprettified version.
I'm gonna grab this and
I'm gonna highlight all of this, and
I'm gonna take this, and
I'm gonna pipe that out to jq-c.
Look at that, right, in your editor.
You can actually use your editor
to manipulate with JQ as well,
which makes it even better.
Now, this does, I'm sure,
what's it called?
VS code has ways in which you can send
stuff out to something like JQ and
then have it edit it and
then replace the text and do all that.
JQ just allows really fun stuff.
So if you just had a log file that you
knew you could do destructive operations
on, you could do stuff, see what it does,
and go, okay, I like this.
Okay, I like this, I like that.
Okay, good, boom, it's in the right setup.
Now I'm happy.
Now I can walk away and so
you can do stuff like that,
which makes it super, super fun.
Absolutely think this is just
the best way to do things.
All right, sorry for the little detour.
I'm really sorry,
that's actually pretty awesome.
All right, so, let's look at the data.
Let's pretend we want to sum
all the foo values per struct.
You had a log that had
a list of numbers and
you just wanted the sum out of each line.
If you're not familiar with JQ,
you'd probably naturally just reach for
a node program, cuz J sounds really easy,
or maybe rust and define all your stuff.
And you do something, right?
You would probably reach for a program.
Well, that's generally pretty annoying.
I would say, when you can just go cat,
let's just cat the out.
I know you can provide the file, shut up.
All right, so let's go like this.
Let's go select.
So this allows us to select objects
that have a certain thing about them,
something like this.
How about, if ( .type == "foo"),
There we go.
If I just execute that,
look at what I get.
I only get two results,
I just get the two foo lines.
Okay, so now I'm selecting the things
out I want, that's pretty nice.
Well, then I can take that and
I can pipe it in, or
I can just select out, say the values.
Okay, that's pretty nice.
Now I can take that and I can add
them all together, and there we go.
So I just went through,
I filtered my objects,
grabbed out a property and
then summed on that property.
It's pretty great, right?
I mean, I think that's pretty great,
by the way,
JQ does not stand for jQuery, okay?
JQuerius is very upset
about this land grab.
It's not true, no matter what people say.
All right, so
let's do the same thing again, but
this time, I don't wanna do a destructive
operation where I lose my object.
Okay, so what I wanna do is I can go like
this, valueSum equals, I think it's this.
I may have to remember again.
So forgive me if this doesn't work,
it does work.
Okay, there we go.
We now did type foo values.
And then I created another
object called valueSum and
they're now still JSON objects.
So that's super good, right?
Now we're actually able
to do operations and
change the underlying object
itself really easily.
Again, I can't tell you just how much
time these type of things have saved me
in my life.
I don't have to write programs,
I don't have to do line by line stuff.
And it'll get even better when I show
you other tools that you can use
with JQ at the exact same time,
we'll get there.
Which is pretty great.
So now you can even do even further
amazing stuff, which is we can take
this and we can re-select on top of it.
I only want things with a valueSum
that is greater than 20.
Now it only gives me that one that
has a sum that's greater than 20.
So you can keep on filtering and selecting
and doing these really cool kinda ad hoc
operations, that allow you to kinda
filter through job or a JSON.
And so there's just a tool and
you should just get familiar with,
at least know it exists, get it on your
system, and then talk to ChatGPT about it.
And GPT will probably help you do a lot of
cool stuff, I've used it a ton of times.
I just wanted to show you that it exists,
this will just massively improve
your life knowing about it.
And you can do all this fun stuff like
this just giant thing that we're doing
right here.
Theoretically I could grab that whole
thing, jump into here, highlight this, and
do the exact same thing, and
now we just have a single item right here.
So I can do cool destructive things.
So if you figure out how to do it in your
editor, you can do all that, I mean,
just think that's great.
All right, fantastic.